The Joe Rogan experience. Yeah. Well, this is why you're here. Um.
We're here to talk about that. Um, and well,
I guess you should probably just explain what's going on.
Well, um, I guess I'll, I'll just kind of take you through the,
the order of events here. Um, you know, uh,
that was my 10th fight fighting for the belt tour title and,
uh, and all my other nine fights previously,
it was never required for me to get a brain scan done.
Um, just due to the, to the different states that I was fighting in at the time,
the commissions there didn't require it, um, in the U S it's, California,
New York, and then Europe, um, you know, requires a brain scan.
We were originally scheduled to fight, um,
in January at the forum in California, um,
the same event that just happened this past Saturday night. Um, and, uh,
so we were going to fight 2019 at the forum in January,
and that fight got postponed. Um,
saucy was injured and we eventually got rescheduled to fight
in June in London. Um,
so I already had a brain scan scheduled, um,
for December, um, to get approved for that fight in January,
but I got the news about the fight getting canceled, um,
like the week of that scan a couple of days before. So I canceled it and I said,
I don't need to go get that done now. Um, and so fast forward, you know,
I basically stayed in camp the whole year, uh, training, you know,
with that fight on my mind all the way from November when I started the first
camp for the fight in January, you know, into the new year,
uh, waiting for the, the new date. Um,
and it was March that, uh,
that I got the word that we were going to fight in June in London. Um,
and so, you know,
I was basically training all year and I just picked right back up into camp
and, um, fast forward, um, on,
into the very beginning of may, um,
I was, you know,
already a good month into like the serious camp.
Um, and I was just getting ready to fly to Brazil, could achieve, uh, uh,
to get into the, you know, the hardest phase of camp. Uh,
I was going to be there for three weeks and I had to get my
MRI done, you know, and I wanted to get it done before I went to Brazil, uh,
just to check it off the list. Um, so this was actually, uh,
the week I had, um, I had two good buddies of mine. Um,
Jake Mapes and Sam Alvey, uh, were in Oklahoma, uh, training with me.
And, uh, we had a great week of training. Everything's going really,
really well. And, um, and it's Thursday.
And so I go get my brain scan done to get that done. Um,
before I went to Brazil and I'm in there and, you know,
we're, we get through the whole process and, uh, the machine is done.
It's not, you know, operating anymore,
but they haven't called me out of the room yet.
And I could kind of just sense something was going on. Um,
so finally they said, okay, come on out.
And the radiologists with really no like no,
uh, candor or, or like, like an easy, soft way of saying it was like,
dude, uh, have you seen your brain before? Um,
there's some stuff in here you need to see.
And he pulls me into the room and shows me on the, on the screen.
He's like pointing out these, um, you know, look like little balls.
Um, uh, obviously it looked like something was wrong.
It didn't look like a normal scan, but I'm not, I don't know, you know,
balls like, like shades of, of,
um, you know, discoloration, like according to the, the scan itself.
Like you could see that, you know, it wasn't normal. Um,
and he didn't even know what it was at the time. And he was like, ah, let me,
let me look this over tonight. And I had my paper and, you know,
to get signed off that everything looks clear and normal and, you know,
and he was just like, you know, he asked me if I had any concussions and,
um, if I've had any issues and I said, no, no. And he's like, well,
this doesn't look right. And you shouldn't be doing what you're doing. I'm like,
okay. So are you going to sign this paper? And he's like, no. And he's like,
come back tomorrow and I'm going to give you some more information. I said,
okay. So I go back Friday. Um,
and he tells me that, you know,
he did some research and he believes that I have a disease called cavernoma.
Um, and you know, he kind of hits me with that. Um,
I had no idea what cavernoma was. Um, and you know,
he says, look, I'm not signing this paper. Um,
you need to go see a specialist and get this looked at. But,
uh, as far as I know, you should not fight, you know,
you should not be fighting. And then the next morning I fly to Brazil,
um, for my camp, you know, to,
to go down there for the hard sparring and everything that I like to do,
you know, stuff we talked about last time.
And so I'm like going, um, you know,
in the airport getting ready to go to Brazil for this portion of my camp,
for this fight. That is like the biggest fight of my life. You know,
I've already waited an extra six months for it.
I've been training for it all year.
And at this point I'm like,
just in shock of what is going on my health.
And, you know,
I saw I'm like Googling everything that I can about cavernoma and trying to,
to understand what it is. And basically it's a disease where probably her, like,
I probably got it from one of my parents. It's a,
it's normally a hereditary disease and your brain, um,
forms these extra blood vessels and these blood vessels
grow and they can accumulate and sort of bundle up together
into balls. Um, almost like, like,
like weeds or vines, you know, they, they,
they wrap up together and, um,
these blood vessels are very prone to bleeding. Um,
now they don't bleed so much in, in, uh, in an instance where,
you know, it could cause a hemorrhage it's more like a slow, they,
they use the term oozing effect.
So to ooze oozes blood out over time, um, very little,
uh, little by little and as they accumulate, you know,
those balls, um, are very, you know,
much more susceptible to bleeding and, you know,
reading about it while I'm getting ready to go, you know,
I'm flying to Brazil, I'm in the airport, I'm taking off. Um,
you know,
there's so many like extreme cases of this disease
where people have to have multiple surgeries to get them
removed. Um, you know, seizures,
vision issues, uh, co people go into comas and then of course,
worse, worst case is even death. And, you know,
obviously Googling and, you know,
not talking to a specialist and just kind of doing my own thing is not the best
way to, to get in for information.
And so I just have all these thoughts running in my head about, you know,
what I'm dealing with in my health and like, okay, uh, now I'm going to,
you know, uh, Brazil to, you know, train and spar and,
and I have this fight and I'm, uh,
right now I don't have anyone signing off on this paper, you know,
is this going to happen? What's going on, like all these questions. And, um,
so I get there and, you know, at this point,
the only one that knows is, um, my girl, you know,
and I'm confiding in her and I'm just like talking to her and she's shocked.
I've never had any issues. I don't even really get headaches.
I've never been knocked out. Um, you know,
there's never been a time in my life where I thought, man,
I should get my head looked at, you know, I think something could be wrong,
you know? And so, um, you know,
talking with her and then I had my coach Mauricio, uh, he's my head, um,
MMA coach and my [inaudible] teacher. Um, and he goes with me down to,
to could Achieva and we train there at his brothers academy,
Andre DDA at Adidas academy. Evolut sounds high. And,
you know, we fly Saturday, arrive Sunday, start training Monday.
And I'm just like, I'm trying to train this first day. And I'm just like,
what am I doing? You know, and I'm getting hit in the head and I'm like, man,
am I slowly killing myself right here? Like, you know,
what am I training for at this point? I'm not gonna, I'm not approved.
Like what, what am I going to do? You know? And, um, and so we,
we talk it over and we're like, okay, obviously we need to get more opinions,
you know? Um, and I'm down in Brazil for three weeks. Um,
basically all of may, um, the fight was June 21st,
um, or 23rd, something like that. And, um,
and so I'm spending all of may there. Um,
so I need to see some Brazilian doctors,
some doctors down here and could achieve them.
And so we've just begin the process. Um, let's get a prescription.
Did he speak Portuguese? Um, I'm not a hundred percent fluent,
but I can get around. I can do pretty well on my own down there,
just from all the trips that I've done over the years. Um, so,
you know, thankfully Mauricio, his brother Dita, um,
they have so many connections down there. Um, you know, uh,
being who they are and the history that they have, um, you know,
teaching martial arts, you know, you get to know everybody, right.
And so they were able to make things happen quick for me. Um,
uh, we saw a doctor, got a prescription for another MRI,
get scheduled to get that MRI done, which happens on Friday,
the end of the, my first week there. So I'm going that whole week training,
you know, trying to stay positive. Um,
but I'm wondering, you know, what, uh, you know, what am I doing?
What's going on? You know what I mean? Like, yeah, I can't,
I can't begin to describe the,
the thoughts and emotions that.
Imagine that it'd be so distracting during sparring as well.
Okay. Oh yes, yes. And you know, they go harder down there. Um.
Put it mildly. Yeah. Yeah.
That place is known for like some of the most ruthless killers to ever come out
of Brazil. 100%. I mean, a hundred percent. That's a shoot the box.
Exactly. Yeah. Um, I'm not sleeping well. Um,
you know, um, um, emotional wreck, basically, I'm calling my girl, uh,
over FaceTime, um, you know, multiple times a day,
we're looking at each other on the screen, I'm crying,
I'm confiding in Mauricio and Shaundra who Beto was also there with me. Um,
I had an Airbnb with Sean G. Um,
so thankfully I wasn't on my own 24 7, uh, outside of the academy.
Um, I used to always stays with his family and, um, you know, I'm just like,
man, when Sean, Sean G arrived, um, that Monday or Tuesday,
and I tell him what's going on, I'm just like, dude, I'm a mess right now. Like,
uh, I don't, you know, I'm just so uncertain of,
of my health and what's going on. And, and, uh, you know,
like I, man, I just can't put into words right now,
but I'm trying to stay positive. I'm trying to stay positive.
And we get through that first week, get the MRI,
the new MRI down there in Brazil. Um, so then we have, you know,
the Brazilian MRI to take to Brazilian doctors.
And so then the second week we start seeing
neurologists and, um, you know,
specialists to get their opinion and, um,
and see what they have to say.
And that was the hardest week
ever because, um,
multiple doctors were all saying, no, um, you know,
when you look at the scan right off the bat, it just like, it doesn't look good,
you know? And when a picture of it, uh, man,
actually, I don't have, sorry,
I don't have one with me right now. Um, but, um,
you know, you just see these gray,
like little shades of circles, like in the,
well I have multiple and most of them are very small,
um, like popcorn size and you know,
those aren't that dangerous at least yet,
but there is one accumulation on the backside of my,
the right side of my head, um, you know,
back here and that has built up and, uh,
and it looks, it looks big. Um, like how big? Um,
probably most probably, uh, like somewhere between a,
like a baseball size, like golf, golf ball to baseball, um, in between there,
Jesus, um, it's, it's pretty big. Um, but it's on the very outer rim.
Um, so it's not like in the middle of my
brain, it's on the outside, you know,
so if you were to go right through my head, it could be right there. You know,
you could essentially pull it out without having to go through too much stuff.
Um.
Is that something that might actually have to happen?
No, not, not now, not now. Um, I'll fast forward, you know,
uh, to the doctors I end up seeing here in the states who clarify a lot of this,
but, um.
That, so the doctors in Brazil all say the same thing. Well, they're kind.
Of just, I mean, you know, fighting already,
isn't good for your brain, you know what I mean? Getting hit in the head,
isn't good for your brain. And I think just looking at it when you see it,
and then you know that I'm going to get hit in the head. And when I do you're,
you're automatically going to be like, uh, Hey, you know,
there's already this extra bit of,
of danger that we're putting in to a dangerous situation.
Let's not, let's not play, let's not roll the dice. Let's not play that game.
Um, and so we were getting multiple doctors, um,
saying no, you know, and, um,
even one was like, you know,
they said that jujitsu could be dangerous that me getting my blood cut off,
like in a choke, um, you know, cutting off the circulation to my brain,
that could be dangerous.
And so this week I am literally not sleeping at all.
I am crying multiple times a day and I'm just like, man, what am I doing?
I'm going into the sparring, you know,
and I'm training and I'm not, I'm not going to get approved.
I'm not going to fight. You know, and this has already been like a six,
seven month training camp at this point, you know? Um,
and it's for the belt. It's my life's work. It's everything for me, you know?
So I was just crushed day in, day out, trying to get through.
And on Thursday of that week,
I'm doing MMA sparring. And, you know, I kind of had it coming.
I shouldn't have, I shouldn't have been going as hard as what I've been going,
but I was like trying to, you know, stay positive and stay ready. Like,
what if I need to, I need to be ready for this fight. You know, it's some saucy,
like I gotta be at my best. And in reality,
I was just training like garbage. I was,
I was having my worst training camp, uh, my worst fight camp, um, you know,
because of everything. And on this day,
I'm in my third round of a may sparring. And I,
I strained my hamstring bad. Um,
I go for like a double leg and the guy has a judo background.
He overlooked like wizards me and goes for like a
[inaudible] type of throw I'm wearing wrestling shoes. I try to drop my hips,
you know, so he doesn't elevate me and my legs,
my knees go straight and my foot gets stuck in the floor with the wrestling
shoe. And my hamstring just snapped,
you know, like allowed, like pop, pop up and I just scream and I let it go.
And I, you know, I get thrown down and I'm just like, ah, and I, you know, he,
he knew something was wrong. We stopped right there and my leg is just throbbing
and I tried to get up. I couldn't get up. So I had to like walk on my hands,
scoot off the mat.
I got carried out of the academy that day could not walk.
And I'm sitting down on the edge of the mat and I I've just like, um,
I burst into tears and I looked to, I look up to Mount ISA and I'm like, man,
it's not going to happen. Like, there's no way, you know, all this is going on.
I'm not approved. I'm training, horrible. I can't walk now, you know?
And so, you know, that was the end of week two, all knows.
We have one more doctor to see. Um,
who's like the professor of many of the doctors that I
already saw. He's very highly regarded.
One of the best doctors in the south of Brazil, uh,
neuro specialist neurosurgeon. Um,
we were so lucky to get in, to see him and, you know,
cause he's booked up, booked up, booked up,
but we managed an appointment time for Monday of the third week,
Monday night. So, you know, I'm like,
I basically given up, I can't walk, uh,
I'm at home that whole weekend and Sean Jean, he, um,
he had seminars on the weekend. You know,
he came down there to support me in camp,
but on the weekends he was going off to teach seminars in different areas of
Brazil.
And so I'm laid up in this Airbnb all
weekend and I'm like just FaceTiming my girl. And I'm like, you know, behaving,
like, I don't think this is happening.
I can't believe come this far, you know,
to the title shot this much training, you know, for the camp,
like going from November of 2018 into the end of may of
2019. That was my, that was it.
It was just this fight with massage and, uh, uh, you know,
it took everything for me. Like this sounds funny, but the,
the house, the Airbnb, the host, you know, she's like a great host.
She left so many chocolates and all this food in the house like sweets.
And I just wanted to pig out and eat all these chocolates, you know?
Uh, I kept telling Shaundra, bro, you got to eat these things. Like, I,
I can't look at these I'm so I'm such an emotional wreck right now, you know,
and I'm in,
I'm in the spot all weekend by myself and I'm ready to give up.
I'm like, I'm going to go eat [inaudible]
, you know what I mean? And eat all these chocolates and just like, you know, cause I have to diet very strict to make 180 5.
What do you walk around at around two, 10 to two 15 is my normal weight.
You know, so I mean that weight is kind of normal.
Like most guys at 180 5 or around two 10, but I'm already tall.
I'm already naturally pretty lean. So I have to be very strict on my diet, um,
to, to get that low.
And it took everything for me to not just take out and
just like totally given, but, you know, uh,
Mauricio was just like, Hey, we have one more doctor, one more doctor.
The whole weekend, all I did was just put CBD cream on my leg,
a resilience CBD and shout out to them and my sponsor. Um,
and I use using the Marc pro on my, on my leg. Um,
so to mark pro it's like a, somewhere to like a tens unit,
but it has different frequencies and you can go really deep in there.
And so I'm just like, okay,
let me just try to recover this thing as much as I can. I couldn't train,
couldn't do anything. I was basically stuck at home. Um, and that's all I did.
And I just said, okay, Monday night, that's it. If he says, no it's done.
And at this point I hadn't told anything to any, I let my manager ed now,
but we hadn't said anything to anybody else. Um,
literally the only ones I knew were my girls, Sean Giamatti, UCO and ed.
And so we go see this doctor Monday night and
man right off the bat,
he kind of captivated us because he was the first one to be
just chill and just like, okay, what's going on? What brings you here?
It didn't look at any pictures. Didn't, you know, didn't rush it.
And I tell him, uh, yeah, you know, I got my scans,
it looks like I have cavernoma dah. He said, okay, let me see your scans.
And he's like, yeah, yeah, this is, this is a cavernoma for sure. Um,
how do you feel the first one to ask me? How do you feel?
And so well, uh, you know, um, this is all a huge shock.
I've never had any problems. I feel great. I'm fine. You know, I, you know,
I don't even get headaches and um, he's like, okay.
Um, you know, uh, he talks with me and he's like, let's go do an evaluation.
We do an evaluation, do some tests. Everything's normal, like just simple, like,
you know, stand on one leg and all that kind of stuff. Um, you know,
and everything's fine. And so we S we go back to the office,
we sit down, he's like, let me just see what I can find,
but I guarantee I'm not going to find anything that says
head impact or trauma is going to increase the risk of your camera,
cavernoma bleeding. And so he starts looking up,
you know, journals and, and, um, you know, uh, studies, uh,
all the things that doctors have access to. And he, he literally finds nothing.
Um, you know,
there is no studies that say that getting hit in your head is gonna
make your cavernoma worse or, or cause you to bleed. And,
and something's going to happen. He's like, look, you can bleed,
you know, you can be oozing blood at any point in time, uh, little by little,
um, and it could become an issue at some point in time.
Um, but there is no treatment. There is no we're not going to do surgery.
Like there's nothing that's going to happen until you have symptoms until you
show signs.
And because I can't find any studies that say getting hit in the head is going
to make it worse. And because you are, you know, a normal,
like healthy functioning person at this point,
I think it's fine for you to fight.
You should continue doing what you do until it becomes a problem.
And if it does become a problem,
we'll go in there and we'll take it out the big, the big mass, um,
and you know, then we'll, we'll move forward. Um,
and so I'm just like, uh, you know,
I started getting emotional already and I'm kinda like, wow, are you,
so you'll write a letter saying this you'll you'll, you'll support me.
And he's like, yeah, sure, sure, no problem. Super calm guy, just,
and he was the oldest doctor we had spoken to as well, um,
most experienced. And so we get this letter, man.
We walk out of that office, uh, me and Maddie UCO. And as soon as we,
we leave the door and we'll get to the elevator, man, I just,
I just like burst into tears. I just,
I can't believe that there's some hope like this,
this can still happen and me and Mauricio embrace and just, we both cry.
I'm like, oh my God, we got the letter, we got the letter.
So I, uh,
I send a letter to EDD and we begin the process of
trying to get approved. We get everything into Bella tour,
let them know they got the scans. Um, they send it over to the Europe, uh,
commission. They use an organization called safe MMA. Um,
and you know, we kind of like, we're happy,
we're positive, but at the same time, I'm still not approved.
It's still not on, you know, but, uh,
the letter is like, that was the missing piece.
That was what we needed to be able to move forward.
So I finished that last week, um,
unable to really move, uh, you know,
I can't wrestle, I can't kick. And my last week in Brazil, you know, uh,
I'm literally just hitting mids like this. And I'm like, okay,
trying to stay positive. I still have like a month, let's get this healed.
Let's just keep sweating. Did you get an MRI and a hamstring? No,
I didn't get MRI in the hamstring. Um, it, uh,
it didn't have any discoloration, so it wasn't a tear. Um,
it was like a severe strain, but with the popping,
it didn't turn black and blue. And so without that color discoloration,
I didn't, I almost didn't even want to know. I was just like, right. You know,
like when did it start feeling better? It didn't really,
I actually still feel it now. Uh, it, yeah.
Um, it was a situation the whole way. Um,
but I could stand so I could stand and
all I'm doing is boxing now at this point,
because I can't throw a kicks and I can't change levels to, to do take-downs.
Um, and so that was a whole nother thing because, you know, as I'm waiting to,
to hear back on, if I'm going to get approved, I'm only punching mitts.
Like I might as well be doing like a cardio kick kickboxing class, you know,
without kicks.
And that was the last thing that I want to do with massage is just go in there
and box, you know, that's not what I do. Right. So
the, the hardships and frustrations were just continued, um,
as I'm dealing with my hamstring, but at least we had some,
some hope. Um, so I finished that week,
fly home. Um,
and I'm finishing like my last couple of weeks of camp at home in Oklahoma,
Shoji comes to Oklahoma, you know, Maddie UCO was there and, um,
I'm trying to put together some great training.
One of my best training partners from coulda Chiba, his name's Chris Cristiano.
He came to Oklahoma as well. Um, and you know,
everyone's aware of the situation. As far as my coaches, my team,
I did not tell my parents. Um, I, I didn't want anyone to know.
I didn't want it to get out. Um, and so I was just dealing with it with them,
you know? And, um, and so we send everything in,
um, and we're waiting, we're waiting the,
this guy, his name is Yani. He's on the commission was safe MMA.
He reaches out to me like after the first week and he said, Hey,
we need to talk. And so I give him a call and, uh, he's like,
we got the letter, we're looking at your scans.
We've actually created a panel of doctors to talk about this.
Um, and at this point it's 50 50, you know,
and just want you to know we're, we're unsure if we're gonna approve.
Um, and I just want you to hear, you know, I just wanted to touch base with you.
When did you hear from me? We see everything,
but you have to understand where we're still not sure. So bear with us.
I'm like, okay, try to get through the next week.
Um, ha I had some decent days with my hamstring, um,
where I could shoot a little bit and work some takedowns, but, um,
if I had a good day,
the next day I had to take it real light because it was just, it was so tight,
so tight, so tender. Um, did you get a massage at all? Oh yeah.
I was doing everything, everything possible. I mean,
getting it worked on, um, doing hot cold, like, you know,
I'm, I'm pretty like anything out there
that is for recovery. I have probably at my house, you know, um,
I'm big on really taking care of my body.
So I was just trying to be as smart as I could and just get through it.
And, you know,
we come to this point now where the fight is two
weeks away and I don't know if it's on or
not. Um, you know,
and I'm just trying to put together as good of training as I can stay as
positive as I can. But at the same time, I'm just like, man, I need the, yes.
You know, I need to be able to, to focus.
How are you staying conditioned when you, you barely can use your leg.
Man? It was, it was really hard. Um,
I was heavier. I was walking around heavier than what I normally would,
um, for, for my fights, you know,
by this time I'm normally below 2 0 5, um,
in the 200 to 2 0 5 range,
that's where I like to get to just off pure diet and off training.
And I was still two 10 to two 12. Um, you know,
it was hard. Like, I, I couldn't, I could box, you know,
and I could box hard and I could spar boxing, but without wrestling,
I didn't feel like I was conditioned the way I want it to be. Um,
I couldn't sprint, I could ride the bike. Um,
the bike didn't put too much pressure,
but I couldn't go all out the way I would like to. I can Airdyne yeah.
Airdyne um,
everything was not the way it would normally be done now, you know,
you're never a hundred percent, you're always dealing with something, you know,
I've, I've had a broken nose before cuts rib things.
Like there's always something, you know. Um, but, um, but it was,
it was the stress of both in,
in the uncertainty and if we would get to fight it all, yeah.
That was really hard. And for sure, that's why I got hurt. You know,
that's 100% why I got hurt. Um, but anyways,
um, finally on like the last day that they could
give me the answer, they gave me the answer and I got the email and it said,
we've approved you, you are approved to fight two weeks before the fight.
Wow. I held off on, you know, I'm flying my family there.
You know what I mean? I have all my, my, uh, there's the,
the corner coach has been, I have a couple other coaches that I was, you know,
gonna fly out there and I was waiting to purchase these tickets. And, you know,
I had some other guys like, Hey, where are you staying? What's what's going on?
Like, uh, I'm ready. And I'm like, Hey, don't don't book anything just yet.
Don't look at me cause I don't want them to buy tickets to London and you know,
I'm not fighting and I'm trying to like be cool and not give
anyone to, you know, uh,
too much an idea of what's going on and stay positive,
stay confident and everything. Finally,
we got the green light and I'm literally flying a few days later to London.
Uh, I, we left on Tuesday, uh, and arrived there Wednesday.
I got there like 10 days before.
So I have one weekend before the weekend of the fight. Um,
and, uh, you know, at this point it was like, okay, once we got that, yes.
I mean, we celebrated, it was like, you know,
that's all I wanted. I mean,
I had already fought so hard just to be able to get to this fight.